thank you to nordvpn for supporting pbs
what do the strong nuclear force the
fundamental symmetries of nature and a
laundry detergent have in common well
they're all important parts in the tail
of the axion a tale which may eventually
take us beyond the stanton model and
solve one of the most vexy mysteries in
astrophysics
[Music]
the history of the axion is a classic
physics tale intrepid scientists delve
deep into trackless mathematics in
search of answers to a mystery
and there against all expectations they
find the hint of a completely new and
unexpected denizen of the natural world
in this case the mystery was a subtle
inconsistency in the behavior of the
fundamental forces
and the unexpected discovery
a brand new particle the axion which
well not yet proven to exist may explain
a much more famous conundrum the axion
may explain
dark matter to understand the origins of
the axion we need to go back and look at
one of the most powerful concepts in
physics
symmetry
we expect the laws of physics to be
symmetric with respect to certain
properties of the universe
if the equations describing a given
physical process do not change when you
transform a particular property of the
universe
we say that process is symmetric to that
transformation
for example most of physics is symmetric
to mirror reflections the world mostly
works the same when you flip the sign of
the x y and z axes another example is
flipping the charges of particles
positive to negative and vice versa most
of the equations of physics hold up
under that flip
but not all
in a previous episode we talked about
how the weak nuclear force is not
symmetric under combined charge and
mirror inversion
or in physics speak the weak force is
not cp symmetric its behavior changes if
you flip charges and do a mirror or
parity reflection
okay so what has all this got to do with
axions well hold on we'll get there
given cp violation in the weak force is
natural to ask if it happens in the
strong nuclear force also
the strong force is the fundamental
force that binds quarks together into
protons and neutrons and is mediated by
the gluon particle
our best theoretical description of the
strong force is quantum chromodynamics
qcd
that's a deep enriched subject that will
get its own episode before long
for now it's enough to know that the
equations of motion of the strong force
derived with qcd
actually allow violation of cp symmetry
in fact they almost demand it and yet no
such violation has ever been observed
here's one example if the strong force
is cp violating it's predicted that the
neutron should exhibit an electric field
like you get from a pair of positive and
negative charges an electric dipole
field
our very sensitive measurements have
found that no such field exists or if it
is there then it's a trillion times
weaker than predicted by a cp violating
qcd
this discrepancy between theory and
experiment is known as the strong cp
problem and is currently unsolved
one of the proposed solutions to the
strong cp problem is going to give us
the axion but before we can see how that
happens we need to understand why
quantum chromodynamics predicts a cp
violation in the first place
compared to quantum electrodynamics
which describes electromagnetism qcd is
complicated to say the least for one
thing the vacuum in qcd is full of weird
structure
you might ask how can a vacuum aka
nothing have structure well in quantum
field theories the vacuum isn't really
nothing
vacuum is the word we use to describe
the lowest energy state of a field
which is what you'll find when there are
no particles around
and as we saw in previous episodes the
vacuum is a very lively place
particularly in qcd
where there isn't just one lowest energy
state there are infinite lowest energy
states and the vacuum can hop between
these different states
but because they're all the same energy
quantum weirdness allows the qcd vacuum
to sort of simultaneously occupy all of
those states at once
this bizarre structure for the vacuum
alters the equations of motion that come
from qcd new terms get added and the
strength of those terms is governed by a
new fundamental constant
theta
it's tricky to describe what theta
actually signifies in fact there are
different physical interpretations but
one way to describe it is that it's a
phase offset picked up by the quantum
field as it moves between the different
possible minimum energy states of the
vacuum and it's these new terms the ones
added by the weird vacuum that appear to
violate cp symmetry
that means the strong force should show
cp violation
so why doesn't it
one possible explanation is that this
data value the constant in front of the
cp violating terms
is just equal to zero
that would cause those terms to vanish
but there's no good reason why theta
should be zero at least not within the
standard model of particle physics
this fundamental constant may have ended
up very close to zero just by chance but
physicists hate using random chance to
explain the precise refinement of a
value what they call fine-tuning
in 1977 roberto pachai and helen quinn
proposed another solution
what if theta isn't a constant but can
change in value both over space and over
time
in other words make theta a new type of
field a dynamic field rather than a
fundamental constant
theta will then naturally fall to zero
because that reduces the overall energy
of the vacuum and the universe always
seeks the lowest energy configuration
by the way there is actually another
solution to the strong cp problem it's
that if any of the quarks are massless
cp symmetry is automatically conserved
however as far as we can tell none of
the quarks are massless and so this
solution is not generally accepted
turning theta into a quantum field is
the most promising solution
so you might recall that in quantum
field theory a particle is just an
oscillation in a quantum field so with a
new field this theta field we have the
potential for new particles
theta can oscillate very slightly around
its value of zero and that oscillation
gives us the axion
it was actually two of the titans of
physics frank wilcheck and steven
weinberg who first realized that this
new field could be quantized to give
rise to a new particle
wheelchair once explained how they chose
a name for their new particle they named
it after axion detergent because it
seemed to clean up the cp problem quite
well
this hypothetical axion particle would
have no electric charge no quantum spin
be extremely light a tiny fraction of
the mass of the already tiny electron it
would interact very weakly by the strong
and weak nuclear forces and via gravity
so how can we expect to detect such an
elusive particle well even though axions
have no electric charge they can still
interact with the electromagnetic field
and produce photons via the strong force
they would do this by generating a pair
of virtual quarks which then decay into
photons the so-called primakoff effect
this would look like an axion turning
into a photon typically in the presence
of a strong magnetic field and photons
can turn into axions in a similar way
and this actually gives us an experiment
it should be possible to shine a light
through a solid opaque wall
it goes like this
a light is passed through a strong
magnetic field and then blocked by a
metal wall but some photons get
converted to axions in the field and so
they pass directly through the wall
before turning into photons again where
they can be detected
at least in theory so far several
experiments
have not confirmed axions this way at
least so far
one issue may be that we just can't make
sufficiently strong artificial magnetic
fields
so why not let nature do at least half
of the heavy lifting
well that's precisely what the cern
axion solar telescope cast in
switzerland does
if axions exist then they should be
produced in reasonable quantities in the
core of the sun
there x-rays are constantly bouncing off
electrons and protons in the presence of
strong electromagnetic fields
perfect conditions for producing axions
among other things
so the sun's core may spew out countless
axions
cast forms the detector part of the
apparatus and uses strong magnetic
fields of its own to try to turn these
axions back into detectable photons
no luck yet but the range of possible
properties of axions is being narrowed
down there are other spacey tests for
axions magnetars highly magnetic pulsars
and quasars may convert some of their
own gamma-ray output into axions and
that dip in gamma-ray output may be
measurable
in a separate phenomenon there does
appear to be a slight over-abundance of
gamma rays from very distant
astrophysical sources like blazars a lot
of those gamma rays should be absorbed
traveling through the vast not quite
empty tracks of intergalactic space on
their way to us
it appears that too few of those gamma
rays are absorbed and so some
astrophysicists have hypothesized that
some gamma rays get converted back and
forth between axions and photons by the
magnetic fields of entire galaxies that
makes them invisible for part of their
journey so less likely to be blocked
experiments thus far have not given
reliable positive results
but it may be that axions are just
lighter or more weakly interacting than
we think and so not detectable by
current experiments
but new experiments and upgrades of
existing experiments will whistle away
at the parameter space of possible axion
properties and eventually we'll either
spot one or decide it's a lost cause
this all seems like a lot of work for a
hypothetical particle predicted from
speculative math
but there's a good reason for the effort
axions maybe dark matter
they have all the right properties
no direct interaction with light and
only weak interactions via the other
forces
although these particles are extremely
light axions if they exist are likely to
have been produced in prodigious numbers
in the big bang
that means there could be enough of them
to explain the invisible source of
gravity that seems to dominate the
universe what we call dark matter
if axions do turn out to be real they
may clean up two of the most vexing
problems in modern physics the strong cp
problem and the nature of dark matter
not bad for one of the tiniest and most
elusive potential particles
in all of space time
we'd like to thank nordvpn for
supporting pbs
imagine vpn is a secure encrypted tunnel
for online traffic to flow
nobody can see through the tunnel and
get their hands on your internet data
nordvpn allows you to use public wi-fi
in coffee shops or hotels or anywhere
else that you're on someone else's
network that way you can access personal
and work accounts on the road or simply
keep your browsing history to yourself
they don't log your activity while
you're online they've got thousands of
servers in 60 countries and 24 7
customer support
to learn more about nordvpn just check
out the link in the description
last week we tried to figure out whether
a universe that is infinite in size
should contain infinite repetitions of
everything it contains
including you
infinite comments ensued of which i'll
now answer a finite number
revolver ocelot pointed out a medium
article by ethan siegel that claimed
that even if inflation proceeded for the
entire age of the universe the universe
would still not be large enough to get
duplicate regions
well i want to thank you for giving me
an opportunity to pick a fight with
ethan siegel who is almost always right
or most ethan calculates that if the
universe was inflating for its entire
current age then after those 13 and a
half billion years it would be around 10
to the power of 10 to the power of 50
times the size of our observable
universe and that sounds about right
he then compares that to an estimate of
the number of possible configurations of
particles in the universe
10 to the power of 90
factorial
now i assume ethan got that number by
imagining swapping around every particle
in the universe in all possible
combinations
well many of those particles are
indistinguishable from each other
swapping two electrons or two photons
doesn't change anything so that number
might be an overestimate
but at any rate 10 to the 90 factorial
is around 10 to the power of 10 to the
power of 90 within a few orders of
magnitude
and i actually gave a larger number the
universe's bekenstein bound which is
around 10 to the power of 124 giving
something like 10 to the power of 10 to
the power of 123 configurations
at any rate it would therefore take way
longer than the age of the universe for
inflation to make a volume 10 to the
power of 10 to the power of 90 or 123
times our observable universe so ethan
is right there
but
inflation would get you there eventually
as long as it never ended
and that's pretty much the definition of
eternal inflation ethan also points out
that eternal inflation must have had a
beginning so it hasn't yet lasted for
infinite time
well also true
but there's no reason to imagine that we
are near that beginning and actually
13.5 billion years would be pretty close
to the beginning of an infinitely long
lasting eternal inflation
of course all of this is assuming that
the universe is spatially finite
the simplest interpretation of the
cosmological equations derived from
general relativity tell us that it may
be truly spatially infinite in which
case 10 to the power of 10 to the power
of 90 is a piece of cake
paul gaither asks how far away are these
duplicate
universes very very far away roughly
speaking you need to travel all the way
across a greater universe that is itself
large enough to fit all possible
configurations of observable universe
size regions the volume would want to be
say 10 to the power of 10 to the power
of 123
or 90 times our universe's volume
so the distance is the square root of
that
let's say 10 to the power of 10 to the
power of 60ish times the diameter of our
universe
until things start to repeat again in
last week's comment responses i
corrected my pronunciation for newton's
book
and then lots of people corrected my
correction
principia mathematica principia
mathematica principia mathematica
many people swearing by each of these
pronunciations so from now on it's that
thing newton wrote anyway it seems like
some of you are let's say
quite detail-oriented and so i was
terrified you'd be mad that the infinite
typewriter monkey we showed was actually
a chimpanzee so a great ape totally
different thing to a monkey but no one
even commented on it come on guys if
you're gonna nerd why not nerd all the
way
you